### **ðŸ“ˆ The Complex Orchestrator: A Real-Life Example**

My team and I were in charge of a complex orchestrator, the brain of our
financial system. It was a beast, interacting with ten different
downstream systems, and this entire process was critical for our
customer billing cycle. Initially, our system was designed for
small-scale customers, like local shops with just one or two branches.
For them, a simple, sequential billing flow worked perfectly.

The initial implementation was based on a straightforward logic: for a
given customer, we would sum the daily usage of a service across all
their stores to get a **global total**. We would then find the one
billing slab that corresponded to that total volume and apply that fixed
price per unit to the entire total. This was efficient and proper for
the low density of services and limited number of stores we had at the
time.

Then, we landed a major client: a large chain of retail stores with
hundreds of locations and a high density of services. This customer had
a unique billing rule that our system wasn\'t built for. The daily price
for a particular service was not based on a single, global total. It was
based on a **progressive, tiered slab** that depended on the **total
cumulative volume of that service availed across all of their stores**.

For example, the first 1,000 units of a service might be priced at
\$1.00 per unit, the next 2,000 at \$0.80, and so on. The problem was
that our existing \"total-and-price\" design was killing us. We
couldn\'t just get a final total and apply one price, because the
billing was a chained process. The first store's usage would get a rate
from the first tier. The next store's usage might cross into a new tier,
and its units would be billed at a different, higher price. To get the
correct bill, we had to process the stores in a specific order and
calculate the cost incrementally, which was a massive, redundant task
for our old system. The orchestrator was turning what should have been a
quick process into a multi-day ordeal. Our VP was getting constant
escalations because the delays were hampering internal financial
reporting.

### **ðŸ’¡ The \"Aha!\" Moment**

A teammate, Aleena, pointed out the core of the problem. \"The final
bill isn\'t a simple sum,\" she said. \"The price for a store depends on
the volume of all the stores that came before it. We\'re building a
solution store by store, but our current system recalculates everything
from scratch each time. We need to save our work.\"

This was our introduction to **dynamic programming**. We realized that
the core of our problem was a series of **overlapping subproblems** that
built on each other. The big problem (the final daily bill) was made up
of many small, dependent calculations (the optimal price for each
individual store based on the running total). We could solve the problem
for the first store, then use that solution to inform the calculation
for the second store, and so on, until we had the final, optimal daily
bill for all stores.

### **How We Used Dynamic Programming: The Table Method (Tabulation)**

We used an approach called **Tabulation**, which is like filling out a
table to solve a puzzle.

1.  **Identify Subproblems:** We broke the problem into its simplest,
    repeatable subproblems: minCost\[i\] which represented the total
    minimum cost for the first i stores.

2.  Establish a Recurrence Relation: We found that the minimum total
    cost for i stores could be calculated from the minimum total cost of
    i-1 stores, plus the optimal price for the i-th store, adjusted for
    the new cumulative volume. The price of the i-th store was not
    static; it changed based on the total volume up to that point.\
    minCost_i=minCost_iâˆ’1+optimized_price(store_i,total_volume_i)

3.  **Create a DP Table:** We used a **bottom-up** approach, creating a
    simple array or table to store the minCost for each store as we
    processed them. The first cell of the table, dp\[0\], was the cost
    of the first store, and from there we built up.

4.  **Handling the Delta between Slabs:** This was the crucial part.
    When we moved from calculating minCost\[i-1\] to minCost\[i\], we
    looked at the delta in volume (the usage of just the i-th store). We
    applied the tiered pricing logic **only to this delta**. For
    example, if the first i-1 stores used 900 units, and the i-th store
    used 200 units, the new cumulative total would be 1100 units. We
    wouldn\'t re-calculate the cost for all 1100 units. Instead, we
    would calculate the cost for the 200-unit delta. The first 100 of
    those units would be billed at the rate for the 901st to 1000th
    unit, and the remaining 100 units would be billed at the rate for
    the 1001st to 1100th unit. This granular calculation, based on the
    minCost of the previous step, ensured that the final bill was
    correct and efficient.

By implementing this dynamic programming approach, we eliminated days of
redundant work. The orchestrator\'s performance skyrocketed, the billing
cycle shortened, and the escalations to our VP stopped. We had solved a
business problem by understanding and applying a fundamental concept in
computer science.

### **The Core Concepts of Dynamic Programming ðŸ§ **

**Dynamic programming** is a powerful problem-solving method that solves
complex problems by breaking them down into simpler, overlapping
subproblems and then saving the answers to those parts so you don\'t
have to solve them again. The two most important ideas are:

- **Overlapping Subproblems:** This means you see the same simple
  problem over and over again. For us, each store\'s calculation was a
  subproblem that needed information about the total from all other
  stores.

- **Optimal Substructure:** This means the best solution to the big
  problem is made up of the best solutions to the smaller problems. Our
  final, cheapest bill was a result of finding the cheapest way to
  combine the costs of all the individual stores.

### **C# Templates: The Blueprints**

Here are general C# templates for both top-down (memoization) and
bottom-up (tabulation) dynamic programming solutions.

#### **Method 1: Top-down with Memoization ðŸ§ **

This approach uses recursion with a cache (like a Dictionary) to store
results. Before computing a value, you first check if the answer is
already in your cache.

C#

public class MemoizationSolver

{

// A cache to store results. The key is the subproblem, and the value is
its computed result.

private Dictionary\<int, int\> memo = new Dictionary\<int, int\>();

public int SolveProblem(int n)

{

// Check the cache (memo) before computing

if (memo.ContainsKey(n))

{

return memo\[n\];

}

// Base cases for the recursion

if (n \<= 1)

{

memo\[n\] = n;

return n;

}

// Recursive step (the overlapping subproblem)

int result = SolveProblem(n - 1) + SolveProblem(n - 2);

// Store the result in the memo before returning

memo\[n\] = result;

return result;

}

}

#### **Method 2: Bottom-up with Tabulation ðŸ“ˆ**

This approach uses an iterative loop and an array (a table) to build the
solution from the ground up, starting with the base cases.

C#

public class TabulationSolver

{

public int SolveProblem(int n)

{

// Handle the base cases first

if (n \<= 1)

{

return n;

}

// Create a table to store the results of subproblems

int\[\] dp = new int\[n + 1\];

// Fill the table with the base cases

dp\[0\] = 0;

dp\[1\] = 1;

// Iterate from the bottom up to solve the problem

for (int i = 2; i \<= n; i++)

{

dp\[i\] = dp\[i - 1\] + dp\[i - 2\];

}

return dp\[n\];

}

}

### **Debug Section: Common Pitfalls ðŸš§**

- **Failing to Identify Subproblems:** You have to first see that your
  big problem is made of smaller, repeated problems. If you don\'t see
  this, you can\'t use dynamic programming.

- **Getting the basics wrong:** The very first, simple answers in your
  table (called \"base cases\") must be correct. If they\'re wrong,
  everything else will be wrong, too.

- **Mishandling the Cache:** Forgetting to store results in the
  memoization table or not checking the table before computing a value
  will defeat the purpose of using dynamic programming.

- **Overlooking Optimal Substructure:** Ensure the problem\'s overall
  optimal solution truly depends on the optimal solutions of its
  subproblems. For some problems, a greedy approach might be better.

### **Key Takeaways ðŸ”‘**

- Dynamic programming solves problems by breaking them into smaller
  parts.

- It saves time by storing answers to those parts.

- You can do it from the top-down (**Memoization**) or bottom-up
  (**Tabulation**).

- It\'s great for problems where you need to find a minimum/maximum
  value or a total number of ways.

### **Sample Problems by Category and Difficulty ðŸ’»**

#### **Memoization (Top-Down) Problems**

**Beginner: Climbing Stairs**

- **Problem:** You are climbing a staircase. It takes n steps to reach
  the top. Each time you can either climb 1 or 2 steps. In how many
  distinct ways can you climb to the top?

- Solution:\
  The problem has an optimal substructure: the number of ways to reach
  step n is the sum of the ways to reach step n-1 (and then take one
  step) and the ways to reach step n-2 (and then take two steps). We use
  a cache to store the results of each subproblem to avoid redundant
  calculations.

- C#

public class ClimbingStairsSolver

{

private Dictionary\<int, int\> memo = new Dictionary\<int, int\>();

public int ClimbStairs(int n)

{

// Check cache for result

if (memo.ContainsKey(n))

{

return memo\[n\];

}

// Base cases

if (n == 0) return 1; // One way to reach step 0 (do nothing)

if (n \< 0) return 0; // Cannot take negative steps

// Recursive relation

int result = ClimbStairs(n - 1) + ClimbStairs(n - 2);

// Store result in cache

memo\[n\] = result;

return result;

}

}

- 
- 

**Intermediate: Coin Change**

- **Problem:** Given an array of coin denominations and a target amount,
  find the fewest number of coins that you need to make up that amount.

**Expert: Longest Common Subsequence**

- **Problem:** Given two strings, find the length of their longest
  common subsequence.

#### **Tabulation (Bottom-Up) Problems**

**Beginner: Min Cost Climbing Stairs**

- **Problem:** Given an array cost, where cost\[i\] is the cost of the
  i-th step, find the minimum cost to reach the top. You can either
  climb one or two steps. The top is the last step.

- Solution:\
  This problem can be solved by building a table of minimum costs. The
  minimum cost to reach step i is the cost of step i plus the minimum
  cost to reach either step i-1 or i-2. We start from the beginning and
  build our way up.

- C#

public class MinCostClimbingStairsSolver

{

public int MinCostClimbingStairs(int\[\] cost)

{

int n = cost.Length;

int\[\] dp = new int\[n\];

// Base cases for the first two steps

dp\[0\] = cost\[0\];

dp\[1\] = cost\[1\];

// Fill the table from the bottom up

for (int i = 2; i \< n; i++)

{

dp\[i\] = cost\[i\] + Math.Min(dp\[i - 1\], dp\[i - 2\]);

}

// The result is the minimum cost of reaching the last two steps

return Math.Min(dp\[n - 1\], dp\[n - 2\]);

}

}

- 
- 

**Intermediate: Unique Paths**

- **Problem:** A robot is located at the top-left corner of a m x n
  grid. The robot can only move either down or right. How many possible
  unique paths are there to the bottom-right corner?

**Expert: House Robber**

- **Problem:** You are a professional robber planning to rob houses
  along a street. Each house has a certain amount of money. The only
  constraint is that adjacent houses have security systems connected,
  and it will automatically contact the police if you rob two adjacent
  houses on the same night. Given a list of non-negative integers
  representing the amount of money in each house, determine the maximum
  amount of money you can rob tonight without alerting the police.
